1 ANOVA and ANCOVA models
These models are really the same as the regression models used for observational data in previous courses such as STAT2008/STAT6038 Regression Modelling, but where some of the explanatory variables are categorical (factor) variables rather than continuous variables (covariates).

However, the models have a slightly different history, as they were originally developed to analyse the results of designed experiments. In experimental design, the categorical factors are typically fixed (pre-determined), rather than observed and therefore the assumption that these X variables are measured without error is definitely satisfied; all the error is in the Y variable, which is a measured or observed response. In previous courses, we also used to make this same underlying assumption; but in the case where the X and Y variables are all observed, what we were really assuming was that the X variables were "known", i.e. able to be measured with a lot more precision and a lot less error relative to the unknown Y variable.

Another different aspect of experimental design models is how they are refined and interpreted. When we design an experiment, we typically have an analysis model in mind and this model certainly includes any factors that we deliberately fix or control. In other words, we have some underlying or a priori assumptions (based on the underlying science or theory) that certain variables are likely to affect the response and should be included in the model. Our default or reference model therefore includes these design factors and we will not remove them from the model, even if they turn out not to have a significant relationship with the response variable - though such a conclusion might lead us to reconsider our assumptions before we design the next experiment.

As with models for purely observational data, the principle of parsimony will still apply to any observed covariates (i.e. variables we could not fix or pre-determine, but which we measured and included in the model in an attempt to control for their possible effects). With observed covariates, we will probably include them in a final model if they have a significant effect on the response and probably not include them otherwise, assuming (as always) that there are sensible underlying interpretations for all of the various terms in the final model.